# VerbasizerGUI

Music played a monumental role in my childhood, and I greatly looked up to David Bowie and his dedication to innovation and taking creative risks. I vividly remember watching a documentary when I was 10 years old in which Bowie demonstrated his songwriting process and found myself enthralled by it. Specifically, he utilized what he called the "cut-up" technique by cutting book pages and other text, shuffling the slivers in a hat and then rearranging the random ones he would pick into lyrics. The fact that this process conceived hits like Moonage Daydream filled me with awe. Shortly after, I watched another Bowie documentary that took place 20 years later where he converted this analog process into a program called the Verbasizer. Unfortunately in 2016, I not only mourned the loss of my childhood hero, but the loss of his revolutionary program that had never been released to the public.     

When I started studying computer science years later, I decided that I wanted to preserve part of Bowie’s legacy by recreating his Verbasizer. Initially, I wrote a program in Java that required users to input their desired text solely through the command line and would have to manually assign these strings to ArrayLists and attempted to write an algorithm that would sort these parts of speech into lyrics that accomodated English grammar structure. Upon learning about machine learning and natural language processing, I realized how redundant my Java program was. Accordingly, I decided to rewrite the program in Python with a full functioning GUI. Some of these features include a textbox where users can directly input their desired strings, a Randomize button so they can shuffle their words according to a Fisher-Yates algorithm without needing to be prompted, a textbox for the output that becomes editable upon Randomization and a drop-down menu so users can save or open drafts at any point. Not only that, but I've incorporated Python's NLTK library to tag parts of speech so that when I implement machine learning with the training of Markov models the output best resembles English language structure. This reconstruction stays true to the original as it focuses on shuffling words inputted by the user into lyrics. However, I have added features that I felt better accommodate the modern artist as Bowie's version didn't permit opening or saving of drafts and the output text was completely randomized with no structure. 

My Verbasizer doesn’t just honor Bowie’s original program, but his mission to represent artists of color. Kanye West has recently publicized the predatory behavior of record labels towards young, starving talent that is disproportionately black. Labels coerce them into lifelong contracts and fulfill their promise of providing resources and connections only to suppress their creative freedom. Meanwhile, the Verbasizer encourages self-sufficiency with infinite inspiration for narratives and rhyme schemes. Artists wouldn’t be alone in the songwriting process and would still be able to profit from directly publishing songs to platforms like Spotify.   Although still in progress, I envision the Verbasizer to be an accessible tool that supports artists without financial or creative sacrifice.        
